---
title: "Building a Spam Classifier from Scratch"
date: 2019-01-08
tags: [nlp-information retrieval-sentiment analysis-Spam Detection]
header:
  image: "/images/spam/bow.png"
excerpt: "Spam detection for an SMS dataset from Kaggle"
mathjax: "true"
---
### Introduction

Spam detection is a classic exercise that presents a solid introduction to machine learning in practice. In this post, we will use some basic tools of natural language processing for sentiment analysis of an SMS dataset from Kaggle. These techniques should allow us to build a system which captures the semantics of each text message and utilize supervised learning algorithms for performance evaluation. Don't worry if you don't have the background for some of these techniques because we're going to build a system from scratch!

### Background

Given our set of text messages, the task is to determine whether each message is spam or not.
Our data is a combination of overlapping words/characters/symbols from each message. Our system should learn from the patterns and frequencies provided by the data to establish a baseline for predictions. This can be broken down into several stages.

First, we need to convert our messages into an exhaustive vocabulary list. Next, we will utilize some processing techniques to control for fixed-effects such as part of speech, punctuation, capital letters, etc. This should produce a better signal for our model by reducing redundancy and noise from our vocabulary list. Finally, we will convert our list into a vector where each character sequence has a corresponding index value. If a message contains a given character sequence from our list, the corresponding vector index will contain a value of one and zero otherwise. We will effectively transform each message into a vector of ones and zeros. All together, the cumulation of these vectors will represent our feature matrix. We will feed this matrix into our algorithms and evaluate its performance. Let's get started!


### Stage One - Building the List

tokenize technique
